[summary]
id:			CR-000037
date_raised:	15/09/2003
raised_by:		Thomas Beale, Sam Heard
title:		Date/time datum last confirmed.

owner:	CC

status:	rejected

[change information]
change_category:	change

analyst:	Sam Heard, Thomas Beale, Dipak Kalra

problem_description:	when voluminous data sources like home-care monitoring
		devices and ICU monitors are in the EHR environment, there is a
		question of what part of the data to put in the EHR. Usually, the 
		clinical users of the EHR want only  "important" data,
		particularly abnormal values, changes etc. One way to accommodate
		this kind of data would be to include a baseline sample, and then
		add a date/time stamp for when that value was last verified. To
		make this work properly, small fluctuations cannot cause new data
		points - there has to be an operating range where the datum is
		considered to be the same at each measurement. 

		A related scenario is when there is already an entry about a
		patient, e.g. recording tobacco use or alcohol intake. The GP
		might verify whether the current statements are still the case -
		in this case there is a need to be able to just mark the existing
		entry(s) as having been reconfirmed at the date when they are
		verified. There are several ways this could be done. The most
		obvious seems to be a new Entry with a link to the original entry
		and an additional  'last_confirmed' date/time. However, the
		consequences for sending data need to be considered (since this
		will be one of the kinds of link types that always has to be
		followed). The other possibility might be to create a new version
		of the original Composition in which the same observation is just
		repeated, but at the new date and time.

		DK: This does concern me quite a bit. I can see the value in 
		workflow terms of having a clinical application deliver this 
		functionality, but I believe that each ENTRY in an EHR ought 
		to be self-consistent unless there are specific linkages between 
		components. I would personally favour duplicating data that has 
		been explicitly re-verified: if the fact is still true and the 
		composer has elected to wish to e-state that fact then it should 
		be re-committed as a fact. (Clearly everyday clinical practice 
		involves accepting many historic facts, with ad hoc re-verification 
		that is not explicitly re-recorded - we are not here seeking to 
		change clinical practice, only to confirm what should be persisted 
		as a consequence of clinical re-verification.)

change_description:	One approach is to add the ability to record just the
		fact of "date/time this value last confirmed" to a recorded item.
		Parameters of what is considered a change would also need to be
		added, so that subsequent differential recording works properly.
		Then only sgnificantly new values will cause new additions. The
		current HISTORY<T> class already accommodates this (nearly) since
		time points can have widths, meaning that long periods of no
		change can be recorded as a single event in a HISTORY, with the
		appropriate time width.

		For the GP scenario, it seems more likely that we would want an
		attribute on ENTRY called last_verified: DV_DATE_TIME or similar.

impact_analysis:		

changed_components:	EHR RM

authorised_by:

implementor:

[test and release]
target_release:		none
test_release:
test_status:

[closure]
date_closed:		09/02/2004

reason_for_rejection:	DK: we should do this simply be recording a new ENTRY 
		containing the the same value as it was last time, and put a link 
		between the new one and the previous one, with a meaning e.g. 
		"confirmed", or also values like "no longer true". These values 
		should come out of the domain termlist work in CEN TC/251. The
		same logic can apply to reducing the amount of data needed to be
		recorded due to high volume output of monitoring instruments.

notes:

